Add part 2 of timecode blog post (#230)
mixxxdj/website: content/news/XXXX-XX-XX-dvs-internals-pt2.md

title: "How does timecode vinyl actually work? (Part 2)"
authors: Jan Holthuis
tags: serato, timecode, dvs, vinyl control
status: draft

In the [last post]({filename}/news/XXXX-XX-XX-dvs-internals-pt1.md), I explained how a basic relative-mode DVS system works.

> But to be able to allow seeking inside the track by moving the needle on the record and reduce sticker drift during scratching, it's necessary to also throw position information to the mix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But to be able to allow seeking inside the track by moving the needle on the record and reduce sticker drift during scratching, it's necessary to also throw position information to the mix(xx).
```

cheesy pun opportunity? ;D

### Using an LFSR

It would be great if we could reduce the number of bits that we need to read  to detect the position reliably - even in the worst case.
One way to do this, is by using a Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR).

**TODO**

## Increasing the signal frequency

Another way to reduce the latency is to increase the signal frequency.
Serato uses a signal frequency of 1000 Hz, Final Scratch uses 1200 Hz and Traktor Scratch MK2 even uses 2000 Hz.
This means that if you play the record at its original tempo, Serato will read 1000 bits in a single second, Final Scratch will read 1200 bits and Traktor Scratch MK2 can read 2000 bits.
Sound like a good way to reduce the latency, right?

Unfortunately, a higher signal frequency also comes with a cost:
The signal's maximum frequency must not exceed half the sampling frequency, otherwise *signal folding* will occur and lead to information loss.
If you use an audio interface with a 44100 Hz sampling frequency (or sample rate), the signal's maximum frequency at which is can be sampled losslessly (called Nyquist frequency) is 22050 Hz.

> When DJs scratch using DVS, the record is moved very fast back and forward, so it's *not* played back the original speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When DJs scratch using DVS, the record is being moved back and forward very fast, so it's *not* played back at the original speed.
```
sounds more natural to me. wdyt?

Reviewer: on second thought, "back and forth" might be the proper term here.

title: "How does timecode vinyl actually work? (Pt. 2)"
authors: Jan Holthuis
tags: serato, timecode, dvs, vinyl control
status: draft
# Base-2 encoding charts using matplotlib: https://gist.github.com/a55f32dab374fa674ac09ced217ca38e

In the [last post]({filename}/news/XXXX-XX-XX-dvs-internals-pt1.md), I explained how a basic relative-mode DVS system works.

> But to be able to allow seeking inside the track by moving the needle on the record and reduce sticker drift during scratching, it's necessary to also throw position information into the mix.

Reviewer 2: Define sticker drift. 

How about adding a picture with a scratching vinyl and a sticker.

Author: Done. I added link to a djtechtools post about stickers on vinyl. Didn't find a good royalty-free image (and I don't use stickers myself).

> But to be able to allow seeking inside the track by moving the needle on the record and reduce sticker drift during scratching, it's necessary to also throw position information into the mix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But to be able to allow seeking inside the track by moving the needle on the record and avoid sticker drift during scratching, it's necessary to also throw position information into the mix.
```

## Getting bits out of the analog signal

> Positions are encoded as bits (i.e. values that can either be 0 or 1).

Reviewer 2: I think you need to explain first what we want. You need to catch the usere, for them a position is either the number of groove in the vinyl or the run time of the track.

Author: I rephrased it a bit, but I didn't find a good way to explain it better. Can you make a concrete suggestion?

> For Serato Timecode, these bits are represented as peaks in the positive part of the signal, where 1 is a relatively high peak, and 0 is a relatively low peak.

Reviewer 2: It is missing that the a position can expressed as a string of 0 and 1 which and express any integer depending of the length or such.

Reviewer 2: To understand you considerations about the number of different values we need to understand what we aim for.
What is the longest track we like to encode? How does the rate of position marks come into play? 
I think this should be clarified berfore diving into solution.

The right channel is just a phase-shifted version of the left one, so we only need to look at the positive peaks of the left channel.

![Serato Timecode Signal]({static}/images/news/timecode-signal.png)

> If we look closely, we notice that the peaks occur every time the right channel crosses zero and the signal value goes from the positive part of the signal to negative part.

Reviewer 2: A marker in the waveform would be helpful and which one is right.

This is very convenient, because that way we don't have to lose any sleep over how to detect the peaks in the left channel, we just detect if there was a positive-to-negative zero crossing in the *right* channel, then take the current value of the left one and check if it's a `0` or `1` by comparing it with a threshold.

Now it's clear how the analog timecode signal can be converted to a stream of bits.
But how can these bits be interpreted as positions?
Or rather: How did the engineers that created the timecode format encode the positions as bits?

## Encoding strategies
### Simple Base-2 Encoding

> The intuitive approach is to encode positions as a sequence of ascending numbers, e.g. the first position is 0, the second position is 1, the third position is 3, etc.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be moved in the paragraph above.

Simple, right?
Unfortunately, this approach has a major problem.

Let's assume you seek to a random position in the track (by picking up the needle and dropping it somewhere) and the
next 3 bits are `001`.
Do you know what position or cycle number we are at?

We can look up `001` in the table above and see that these bits encode position 1 (cycles 3-6).
So after reading these bits we should be at cycle 6.
And that is *one* possibility, but not the only one.

![Simple bitstream with 3 bits per position and all occurrences of 001 highlighted]({static}/images/news/timecode-3-bit-bitstream-highlight.svg)

So there are multiple possible possible positions and we don't know which one is the correct one.
We can mitigate this by reading the next 3 cycles, too, but this doubles the amount of cycles we have to read (6 instead of 3 cycles) until we know the position for sure.

DVS systems are supposed to be responsive and minimize the latency (i.e. the delay between moving the vinyl and seeing/hearing the action in the software) to be usable for scratching.
Therefore, this approach is not sufficient.

### Using Sentinel Values

> The problem with the simple base-2 encoding is that may end up in the middle of a number and we don't know where a number begins or ends.

Reviewer 2: This sentence belongs in the paragraph above.

> If you're a programmer, you might say: "We can use sentinel values to solve this problem."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To reliable detect the beginning of a new position mark, we need something special, that can be clearly distinguished from the position values. Such a value is called a [sentinel value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sentinel_value).
```

> A [sentinel value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sentinel_value) is a special value that is distinct from all other legal values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Such a value could be used to indicate "A new position value starts here".

After a seek, we have to keep reading bits until we encounter the sentinel value, then we can start reading the actual position bits.
In fact, that's exactly what the early [Final Scratch DVS system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_Scratch#Vinyl/CD_time_code) did.
Each position was prefixed by `0001`.

> Of course, that bit sequence must not be part of a position bit sequence, but that can be solved by using a slightly more complicated encoding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I would omit this sentence. The paragraph is complex enough.

> #### Example: Final Scratch

Reviewer 2: Can we drop this paragraph? For me it includes to much details and distract a bit from understanding the whole.

Because these bits are split across both channels, this is equivalent to 20 bits of information of a single-channel bitstream in terms of latency.

The downside is that you can't use the right channel for error detection.
If the bits on both channels are not the same anymore, you cannot compare the bits from both channels to rule out read errors caused by dust on the record.

But the bigger issue is that using sentinel values may still require a lot more bits to be read after a seek before you can detect the position reliably.
In the worst case, the DJ seeks to a position where the first bit of the sentinel value is missing.
Then we have to read the remaining bits of the sentinel value, then all bits of the full position, then next sentinel value and then all bits of the next full position value before we know what position we're at.
Needing so many bits to reliably detect a position is bad for latency and might make the system feel "sluggish".

### Using an LFSR

It would be great if we could reduce the number of bits that we need to read to detect the position reliably - even in the worst case.
One way to do this, is by using a Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR).

> LFSRs are commonly used, for example as pseudo random number generators for stream ciphers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I would drop that.

> Someone at Serato had the interesting idea to use them for encoding positions on their timecode vinyl instead.

Reviewer 2: I would move this eye scathing sentence above and introduce LFSR afterwards. I expect that this will attrackt the reader better.

In the [last post]({filename}/news/XXXX-XX-XX-dvs-internals-pt1.md), I explained how a basic relative-mode DVS system works.
But there are two problems that are still left to solve:

1. Seeking inside a track by picking up the needle from the record and dropping it somewhere else will not work.
2. The basic relative-mode implementation will likely suffer from so-called *sticker drift*.
   This means that if you [put a sticker on the vinyl record as visual aid](https://djtechtools.com/2015/11/04/marking-vinyl-records-with-stickers-throwback-thursday-dj-technique/) and then scratch the record back and forth so that the sticker is in the same position it had before the scratch, the track should also be at the same position.
   If you just use the pitch information, it will likely be too inaccurate to make this work, and track position and sticker position drift apart (hence the name).

Both of these problems can be solved by throwing position information into the mix.
This is why the timecode signal also contains information that can be used to detect the needle position on the record.

> ## Getting bits out of the analog signal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Getting the position out of the analog signal
```

> The signal on the control vinyl uses bits (i.e. values that can either be 0 or 1) to encode position information.

Reviewer 2: Ok let's try: 

```suggestion
From a steady sine waveform alone, it is hard to determine in which groove the needle is and at which rotation degree the platter is moving. One can imagine to count cycles of the wave from the beginning of the control track. Unfortunately this is error prone due to crackling or a sipped groove. The counted number becomes void after such an event. To restore the counted number, a regular position information is required. 
```

> For Serato timecode, these bits are represented as peaks in the positive part of the signal, where 1 is a relatively high peak, and 0 is a relatively low peak.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Serato timecode, this information is added to the sine wave by amplitude modulation (AM) representing the position as a series of low and high amplitudes, digital bits, where 1 is a relatively high peak, and 0 is a relatively low peak.
```

title: "How Does Timecode Vinyl Actually Work? (Pt. 2)"
authors: Jan Holthuis
tags: serato, timecode, dvs, vinyl control
status: draft
# Resources: https://gist.github.com/a55f32dab374fa674ac09ced217ca38e

> In the [last post]({filename}/news/2021-11-21-dvs-internals-pt1.md), I explained how a basic relative-mode DVS system works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the [last post]({filename}/news/2021-11-21-dvs-internals-pt1.md), I explained how a basic relative-mode Digital Vinyl System (DVS) works.
```

But there are two problems that are still left to solve:

1. Seeking inside a track by picking up the needle from the record and dropping it somewhere else will not work.
2. The basic relative-mode implementation will likely suffer from so-called *sticker drift*.
   This means that if you [put a sticker on the vinyl record as visual aid](https://djtechtools.com/2015/11/04/marking-vinyl-records-with-stickers-throwback-thursday-dj-technique/) and then scratch the record back and forth so that the sticker is in the same position it had before the scratch, the track should also be at the same position.
   If you just use the pitch information, it will likely be too inaccurate to make this work, and track position and sticker position drift apart (hence the name).

Both of these problems can be solved by throwing position information into the mix.
This is why the timecode signal also contains information that can be used to detect the needle position on the record.

## Getting the position out of the analog signal

> From a steady sine waveform alone, it is hard to determine in which groove the needle is and at which rotation degree the platter is moving. One can imagine to count cycles of the wave from the beginning of the control track. Unfortunately this is error prone due to crackling or a sipped groove. The counted number becomes void after such an event. To restore the counted number, a regular position information is required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From a steady sine waveform alone, it is hard to determine in which groove the needle is and at which rotation degree the platter is moving. One can imagine to count cycles of the wave from the beginning of the control track. Unfortunately this is error prone due to crackling or a skipped groove. The counted number becomes void after such an event. To restore the counted number, a periodical position information is required.
```

Of course, that is just a toy example, but even if we only had 8 different positions, we need use 3 bits (= 3 cycles) to represent each position.
In reality, we want to encode *a lot* more different positions, which means the resulting binary number will be longer, meaning we need more bits and therefore cycles per position we want to encode.

The corresponding signal would look like this:

![Simple bitstream with 3 bits per position]({static}/images/news/timecode-3-bit-bitstream.svg)

The first 3 cycles encode position 0, the next 3 cycles encode position 1, and so on.
Simple, right?
Unfortunately, this approach has a major problem.

Let's assume you seek to a random position in the track (by picking up the needle and dropping it somewhere) and the
next 3 bits are `001`.
Do you know what position or cycle number we are at?

We can look up `001` in the table above and see that these bits encode position 1 (cycles 3-6).
So after reading these bits we should be at cycle 6.
And that is *one* possibility, but not the only one.

![Simple bitstream with 3 bits per position and all occurrences of 001 highlighted]({static}/images/news/timecode-3-bit-bitstream-highlight.svg)

> So there are multiple possible possible positions and we don't know which one is the correct one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So there are multiple possible positions and we don't know which one is the correct one.
```

> We can mitigate this by reading the next 3 cycles, too, but this doubles the amount of cycles we have to read (6 instead of 3 cycles) until we know the position for sure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can mitigate this by reading the next 3 cycles too, but this doubles the amount of cycles we have to read (6 instead of 3 cycles) until we know the position for sure.
```

> DVS systems are supposed to be responsive and minimize the latency (i.e. the delay between moving the vinyl and seeing/hearing the action in the software) to be usable for scratching.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DVSs are supposed to be responsive and minimize the latency (i.e. the delay between moving the vinyl and seeing/hearing the action in the software) to be usable for scratching.
```
S stands for system already.

Author: ```suggestion
Digital Vinyl Systems need to be responsive and minimize the latency (i.e. the delay between moving the vinyl and seeing/hearing the action in the software) to be usable for scratching.
```

Therefore, this approach is not sufficient.

The problem with the simple base-2 encoding is that may end up in the middle of a number and we don't know where a number begins or ends.

### Using Sentinel Values

To detect the beginning of a new position mark reliably, we need something special, that can be clearly distinguished from the position values.
Such a value is called a [sentinel value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sentinel_value) and could be used to indicate "A new position value starts here".

After a seek, we have to keep reading bits until we encounter the sentinel value, then we can start reading the actual position bits.

> In fact, that's exactly what the early [Final Scratch DVS system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_Scratch#Vinyl/CD_time_code) did.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In fact, that's exactly what the early DVS [Final Scratch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_Scratch#Vinyl/CD_time_code) did.
```

Author: ```suggestion
In fact, that's exactly what the early [Final Scratch DVS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_Scratch#Vinyl/CD_time_code) did.
```

In the Final Scratch timecode, each position was prefixed by `0001`, followed by 16 bit of position information.
Although using a sentinel value ensures that we know when a position starts, this approach is also problematic.
Let me explain why.

> As we already stated, we want the delay (i.e. the latency) between moving the needle and detecting the position to be as small as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we already stated, we want the latency between moving the needle and detecting the position to be as small as possible.
```
A Delay is a time shift between an expected event ant the actual event. Since this does not fit well here I would drop the word here. The relationship is already explained well above

The resulting value is then fed back into the register.

Let's have a look at a step-by-step example.
Here's a 3-bit LFSR that generates a maximal-length pseudo random bit sequence:

![3-bit maximal-length LFSR]({static}/images/news/3-bit-lfsr.svg)

In each step the following happens:

1. We take the current contents of the register to calculate the feedback bit. In this case, we calculate *x = s<sub>1</sub> + s<sub>0</sub>*.
2. Then shift the register to the right.
3. The bit that is "pushed out" of the register (i.e. the rightmost bit *s<sub>0</sub>*) is the output bit
4. The leftmost (empty) space is filled with the feedback bit (*x*) we calculated.

Let's assume that the initial state of the register is *(1, 0, 0)*.

First, we need to calculate the feedback bit *x* which is defined as the sum of *s<sub>1</sub>* and *s<sub>0</sub>*.
In this step, both bits have the value `0`, so *x = s<sub>1</sub> + s<sub>0</sub> = 0 + 0 = 0*
Next, we need to shift everything to the right, and insert *x = 0* on the left.
The output bit is *0*, because that is the rightmost bit that is "pushed out" of the register.

> In the next step, the feedback bit is *x = s<sub>1</sub> + s<sub>0</sub> = 1 + 0 = 0*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the next step, the feedback bit is *x = s<sub>1</sub> + s<sub>0</sub> = 1 + 0 = 0*.
```

Note that this time *s<sub>1</sub>* has the value *1* because we shifted the register to the right in the previous step and *1* moved from *s<sub>2</sub>* to *s<sub>1</sub>*.
Now that we calculated *x*, we again shift the whole register to the right and write the feedback bit into the leftmost position.
The output bit is *0*.

We can now continue this a few more times.
In step 5, the feedback bit is *x = s<sub>1</sub> + s<sub>1</sub> = 1 + 1*.
Usually, the result of that calculation would be *2*, but in this case it's *0*.

> The reason for that is that we're working with bits (which are either *0* or *1*), so *2* is not a valid value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reason for that is the value range overflow. Since we work with bits whose values can be either *0* or *1*, the invalid value *2* is represented as *0*.```

Author: Tbh I like the original phrasing better, I think it's easier to understand for less technically inclined people.

Consider a 24-hours clock:
If it's 23:00 and you wait 2 hours, it's *01:00* and not *25:00*.

> That time doesn't exist, so you just subtract 24 to make it valid (25:00 - 24:00 = 01:00).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That time doesn't exist, so you just subtract 24, which is the number of possible hours from 0 to 23, to make it valid (25:00 - 24:00 = 01:00).
```

> In the same way, you need to calculate *2 - 2 = 0*, because *2* is not a valid bit value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the same way 2 becomes 0, when you calculate *2 - 2 = 0*, because *2* is not a valid bit value.
```

After the first 6 steps we get the following table:

| Step    | *s<sub>2</sub>* | *s<sub>1</sub>* | *s<sub>0</sub>* | Feedback bit *x = s<sub>1</sub> + s<sub>0</sub>* | Output bit *x = s<sub>0</sub>*
| ------- | --------------- | --------------- | --------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------
| 1.      | *1* | *0* | *0* | *0 + 0 = 0* | *0*
| 2.      | *0* | *1* | *0* | *1 + 0 = 1* | *0*
| 3.      | *1* | *0* | *1* | *0 + 1 = 1* | *1*
| 4.      | *1* | *1* | *0* | *1 + 0 = 1* | *0*
| 5.      | *0* | *1* | *1* | *1 + 1 = 0* (mod 2) | *1*
| 6.      | *0* | *0* | *1* | *0 + 1 = 1* | *1*

In the next step, we would insert the feedback bit (1) at the leftmost position and shift the other bits to the right,
which results in the state (1, 0, 0), which is exactly the state we started with.

> From now own, the table rows would just repeat forever.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From now on, the table rows would just repeat forever.
```

| Position       | Bit Sequence |
| -------------- | ------------ |
| 0              | `001___`     |
| 1              | `_010__`     |
| 2              | `__101_`     |
| 3              | `___011`     |

The corresponding timecode signal would look like this:

![LFSR bitstream with 3 bits per position]({static}/images/news/timecode-3-bit-lfsr-bitstream.svg)

We can now observe an interesting property of our 3-bit-LFSR-based output signal:
*Any* sequence of 3 bits in the signal is *unique*.

This is great and exactly what we want, because after reading 3 bits we now know unambiguously which one of the 4 positions we're at.

#### How big does the LFSR need to be?

The example above is obviously a toy example.
In real life, we want to a lot more than 4 different positions.

The Serato Control CD has a play time of approximately 16 minutes 20 seconds, or 16 * 60 + 20 = 980 seconds.
At a timecode frequency of 1000 Hz (cycles per second), we have 980,000 cycles.
Every cycle encodes one bit, therefore we need an LFSR with an output length of at least 980,000 bits before it starts to repeat.

> At most, an n-bit LFSR can output 2<sub>n - 1 bits before it starts to repeat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At most, an n-bit LFSR can output 2<sup>n - 1</sup> bits before it starts to repeat.
```

An LFSR with such a period size is called a maximal-length LFSR, and we already mentioned that Serato states that it uses a such an LFSR on the packaging of its timecode media.

The smallest possible LFSR that can output at least 980,000 bits without starting to repeat needs at least 20 bits of state.
A 19-bit LFSR is too small, because 2<sup>19</sup> - 1 = 524,288 is less than 980,000, but a 20-bit LFSR can output up to 1048575 bits before it starts to repeat.
We don't want to make the LFSR larger than absolutely necessary, because the larger the register, the more bits we need to read before we can detect a position after a needle drop.
Hence, increasing the LFSR's size also increases the latency.

#### A Real Life Example

Let's have a look at a real-life DVS that relies on an LFSR for position detection.
We already know that Serato's timecodes uses an LFSR, but what does it look like exactly?

> Fortunately, we can find out by by using the [Berlekamp-Massey algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berlekamp%E2%80%93Massey_algorithm).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fortunately, we can find out by using the [Berlekamp-Massey algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berlekamp%E2%80%93Massey_algorithm).
```

It takes the bit sequence decoded from Serato's timecode, and finds the shortest LFSR that produces that output.

For the Serato Timecode CD bit sequence, the algorithm finds the following LFSR:

![Serato Timecode CD LFSR]({static}/images/news/serato-cd-lfsr.svg)

We also have to find the correct seed (initial bit state for the LFSR), but this is trivial:

We know the first 20 bits of the timecode (e.g. by simply looking at the waveform) and we also know that this bit sequence is unique.
First, we selecting a random non-zero bit sequence as initial LFSR state and then step through the LFSR states while comparing the output of the LFSR with these first 20 bits of timecode bit sequence.
As soon as we see these 20 bits, we just go back 20 steps to the LFSR state *before* the first bit of that sequence appeared in the output.
This is the seed.

> A DVS system could now generate a lookup table (LUT) that maps each LFSR state to a position.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A DVS could now generate a lookup table (LUT) that maps each LFSR state to a position.
```
